William Burges (1827-1881)
Maidstone
Canterbury
Dover
Penshurst
Chiddingstone
Hever
Leeds

In 1858, William ‘Billy’ Burges, pre-Raphaelite architect and designer, was commissioned by Alexander Beresford-Hope, MP for Maidstone to design the missionary monument at St Augustine’s College, Canterbury. He sketched designs for a sculptured diptych, with one side depicting the meeting of Pope Gregory and the English slaves and the other portraying the conversion of King Ethelbert by St Augustine.[^ref1: ]
Burges was the son of marine engineer Alfred Burges who along with his business partner, James Walker had designed the Admiralty Pier and lighthouse, Dover. Alfred was very successful and his wealth ensured that Billy could study and practice architecture without the pressure of making money. 
After studying engineering at King’s College School, London, where he became friends with pre-Raphaelite artist [Dante Gabriel](/19c/19c-rossetti-biography) and his brother William Michael, Billy entered the offices of Edward Blore, a pre-eminent Gothic Revival architect in 1844. After this, he joined the offices of Matthew Digby Wyatt and worked on the Medieval Court at the Great Exhibition of 1851.
In 1856 Burges set up his own architectural practice and entered several competitions for architectural commissions, but in the early days he was unsuccessful. However, after completing the designs for the missionary monument at Canterbury, Burges’s career began to flourish and in 1859 he was introduced to the Dover Corporation Restoration Committee to take over the work begun by Ambrose Poynter to restore the 13th century Maison Dieu at Dover. Burges’s designs were influenced by his travels in Europe and included carved grotesques on the buttresses and heraldic shields.
It was at this period that Burges, joined the Foreign Architectural Book Society (FABS), an elite group of architects who swapped books on architecture and visited sites of architectural importance. In 1865 they visited Knole near Sevenoaks to admire the Jacobean staircase and in the following year, Canterbury, where they saw the cathedral which Burges described as “the best of our cathedrals, always excluding the perpendicular parts”[^ref: p92]. In 1867, they visited Penshurst, Chiddingston and Hever, returning some years later to visit Maidstone and Leeds Castle.
Further commissions in Kent included the restoration of St Margaret’s church at Darenth. St Margaret’s was built c. 940 AD and is reputed to be the sixth oldest church in England. Burges installed a stained glass window in memory of Catherine Seager between 1866-8.[^ref: https://www.darentvalleybenefice.org.uk/the-buildings]. At the same time, Burges was commissioned to design the Bailey tomb and memorial in the churchyard and adjacent to the chancel of St Peter’s church, Ightham between 1866-9. He also enlarged Ightham Place adding a new staircase, entrance hall and wing for Reverend James Sandford Bailey.
Burges was not only a talented architect, but also a furniture designer. In 1867 he was commissioned to design a crozier for the newly appointed Bishop of Dunedin, Henry Lascelles Jenner. The crozier featured St George slaying the dragon which represented the church defending its people against the devil. Burges wrote in his sketchbook “This is the staff of the Lord Bishop of the Isles where they eat one another”. Jenner who had a reputation for ritualism was rejected by the people of New Zealand on his arrival and the crozier was never used. Jenner returned to England, where he became rector of Preston next Wingham and the crozier is now kept at Canterbury Cathedral.
