“It stands majestic, this great tower, looking out across the most sacred piece of our English earth. It looks across the fields where the Romans came with the sword; it looks across the fields where they came again in peace. It looks down on the ways by which came our first Englishmen. It stands in dazzling splendour, enthroned through the centuries, the shrine and cradle of our race” (Arthur Mee, Canterbury).

From the orchards and fields on the gently rising slopes of Stuppington Hill to the south of the city, are some of the finest views of Canterbury Cathedral. A sixteenth century map, The Civitates Orbis Terrarum, published in 1572, provides a bird’s eye view of Canterbury from this aspect. In the foreground, a small group of well-dressed Elizabethans, in fashionable cloaks, long dresses and ruffs, on a grassy hill, appear to be arriving at the city. One of these is possibly Dutch artist, Joris Hoefnagel, or another artist commissioned to map Canterbury, thus revealing the draughtsman’s perspective of the city, that of an outsider, sketched from the east of the River Stour and Wincheap. 
<param ve-image url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c9/Civitates_orbis_terrarum._Urbium_praecipuarum_totius_mundi._Liber_quartus_%28page_6%29.jpg" label="Civitates Orbis Terrarum" attribution="Georg Braun, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons">

Christian Jacob reminds us that one of the first questions we should ask of a map is “where am I?” but another question might be how did I arrive here? The artist and his companions could have reached the hill from ancient trackways that criss-crossed the area off Wincheap, passing the site where the Kentish martyrs had been executed during the reign of Mary Tudor, or from a path near St Lawrence’s Hospital which had been dissolved during the Reformation. The map offers only one mode of comprehending the space: the detached, bird’s eye view, suppressing the multiplicity of ways humans encounter environments.

The legend on the Civitates Orbis Terrarum reads ‘Cantuaria urbs fertilis simae anoliae celebris archiepisco pati sede commendata’ which translates as Canterbury, a fertile city, famous for its cathedral, entrusted as the seat of the archbishop. Fertile in this context may allude to the farmland owned by the Cathedral priory estates to the east of the city, rather than the clay-with-flint soil to the south of the city which was largely unsuited to arable agriculture (Lake, Edwards and Bannister p.113). Trees dotted along the Stour valley and an orchard in the grounds of St Augustine’s Abbey, reveal the significance of arboreal culture at this time. The William Smith Sloane map published over a decade later in 1588, viewed from the same perspective, only includes one tree at Lady Wootton’s Green and the water meadows near the Stour appear treeless. However, it is known that Leonard Cotton, gentleman of St. Margaret's, alderman and mayor of the city in 1580, left an orchard and its appurtenances in Winchepe in his will of 1605 (Hasted pp184-199). Maps, which are the subjective representations of the artist, become our reality, unless we challenge them.
<param ve-image url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/ef/William_Smith_Sloane_MS_2596_f15_Canterbury.jpg" label="William Smith Sloane MS 2596 Canterbury" attribution="William Smith, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons">

J. B. Harley and Denis Wood argue that maps are not neutral mirrors of reality but symbolic systems that privilege certain forms of knowledge while excluding others. The heraldic shields on the Civitates Orbis Terrarum, reveal the power structures at play in the city - monarchy, Archepiscopat, ecclesia cathed. and ‘civitalis’. The spectacle created by the map is one of civic pride, power and privilege and celebrates a sixteenth century sense of progress, order and urbanity. Its publisher, Georg Braun, not only draws our attention to these, but is also creating audience. What the map does not show is commerce - the wine market in Wincheap, the XXXXX

An earlier twelfth century map of the waterworks of the Cathedral from the Eadwine psalter, shows orchards, vines and wheat to the north east of the city.
<param ve-image url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/bc/Eadwine_psalter_-_Waterworks_in_Canterbury.jpg" label="Eadwine Psalter - Waterworks in Canterbury" attribution="anonymous, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons">

By the seventeenth century, when botanist and gardener, John Tradescant the Elder gardened at St. Augustine's Palace, Canterbury was  ‘a city of orchards, gardens, fields and green spaces, its houses strung like beads along the narrow streets’ (Jennifer Potter Strange blooms : the curious lives and adventures of the John Tradescants, 2006, 84). 

On a topographical map of Kent published by John Andrews, Andrew Dury and William Herbert in 1769, Stuppington Hill appears as part of a range of rounded hills to the south of the city, extending from Charlton and Milton Downs to Nackington. These are part of the lower dip slope of the North Downs and the hills to the east of Hollow Lane are densely wooded. Although cartographic representations can tell us a lot about place, they can also be reductive and the 1769 map tells us little about the area below Stuppington Hill and how it interacts with the cathedral in its landscape setting. Drafted before the invention of contour lines, the map uses shading to illustrate the150 feet climb from the city’s edge to the top of Stuppington hill. Only Hon barn linked by a trackway to the fields behind Mrs Rook’s [sic] estate at St Lawrence, and orchards at Merton hint at the land usage of this area. 

It is quite likely that the regular pattern in the field behind Mrs Rooke’s house represents a hop field or plantation. In July 1751, the Hon. Mrs Frances Rooke had blocked up the ‘only right and ancient way’ to a small parcel of land called the Poor’s Land which was accessed through her estate and ‘set up hop-poles thereon, merely with an intent to interrupt and impede the Occupiers of the said Poor’s-Land in the use and enjoyment of the accustomed Way’. Angered, the people of the city tore down the hop poles and hop bines causing considerable damage. (Letter, Kentish Weekly Post or Canterbury Journal - Wednesday 14 August 1751, no3523, p1) Other hop grounds are also in evidence and in 1796 “a desirable piece of Hop ground, with a messuage and garden, on the whole about one acre; situate in Wincheap, bordering on the high road leading to Ashford and the Weald of Kent” was advertised for sale (‘Freehold Estates’ Kentish Weekly Post or Canterbury Journal - Friday 22 April 1796 no 1695, p1). Hop growing continued into the twentieth century, with Hop pickers advised in 1941 that they could book baskets by writing or calling into Wincheap Farm (‘Hop pickers’ Kent Herald - Wednesday 18 June 1941)The rows of hops when viewed from Stuppington Hill would have created a textured canvas of poles, bines and hedgerows, an agricultural palimpsest set against the pathways of earlier inhabitants. 

By the nineteenth century, the Cathedral’s landscape setting bore the scars of industrialization, with lime works, a ballast pit, a steam saw pit, gasometers and a coal yard now appearing between the Cathedral and Stuppington Hill. With the invention of the railways, the suburb of Wincheap became sandwiched between two lines: the Southeastern and Chatham and the Elham Valley. Thin plumes of steam would have stretched across the valley as theses 'hum-bugs of steel' ripped across the landscape, travelling to and from Canterbury South towards Folkestone.  This, and the expansion of the terraced streets in the Martyrs’ Field area, with their coal fires belching out smoke from chimneys, would have created an ever-changing foreground to the Cathedral, with its pale Caen stone towers floating above the haze.


### References

Harley, J.B. and Woodward, D. (eds.) _The History of Cartography: Cartography in Prehistoric, Ancient and Mediaeval Europe and the Mediterranean_. Vol. 1. University of Chicago Press.
Hindle, S. _The Cocial Topography of A Rural Community : Scenes of labouring life in Seventeenth Century England._
Jacob, C. T. _The Sovereign Map – Theoretical Approaches in Cartography Throughout History_. The University of Chicago Press, 2006.
Lake J.E., Edward B, Bannister N.I. "Farmsteads and Landscapes in Kent." _Archaeologia Cantiana_. 2014;134:105-39.

