Crime Fiction
Carolyn Oulton
It is probably no coincidence that the 1920s and ‘30s, celebrated as the Golden Age of crime fiction, saw the publication of so many Kent-based novels. Every summer during these years crowds of people caught the train to British seaside resorts, looking for sunshine and adventure, seasoned with a dash of escapist reading. The trend for holiday page-turners might be said to have begun in the 1860s, when sensation authors such as [Mary Braddon](/19c/19c-braddon-biography) and [Wilkie Collins](19c/19c-collins-biography) realised that the railway itself could provide an exciting setting for mystery and intrigue. The theme was taken up by later writers such as [Arthur Conan Doyle](/19c/19c-conan-doyle), who sends Holmes and the hapless Watson careering around England from their base in London. But if travelling by train offered just the right feeling of danger, readers knew that almost anything could happen when they reached the seaside.
By the twentieth century the sensation novel was starting to splinter into two distinct genres associated with beach reading to this day: romance and crime. Denizens of the former included authors such as [Pamela Wynne](/20c/20c-wynne-biography). Crime writers were quick to see the appeal of murder mysteries with holiday settings. J. S. Fletcher’s _The Passenger to Folkestone_ (1927), John Rowland’s 1930 _Calamity in Kent_ (set in what is so obviously Broadstairs there seems little point in calling it Broadgate), and Freeman Wills Crofts’s _Mystery in the Channel_ (1931) directly reference real holiday locations, while Milward Kennedy’s 1930 _Death in a Deck-Chair_ is set in a lightly fictionalised Margate. 
The potential of the Romney Marsh, exploited by Russell Thorndike and his smuggling vicar Dr Syn, was also to catch the attention of later writers including [Julian Symons](/20c/20c-symons-biography) and most recently [Martin Edwards](/21c/21c-edwards-sepulchre-street).
Straying from the coast, [R. Austin Freeman](/20c/20c-freeman-biography) picks up on the [Dickensian](/dickens/edwin-drood-curated-walk) associations of Rochester in _The Mystery of Angelina Frood_ (1924) and John Rhode suggests that there is _Death in the Hop Fields_ in 1937. Writing after WW2, Cristianna Brand uses the atmosphere of war to explore extreme situations in _Green is For Danger_ (1944) and _At His Residence_ (1946).
The [British Library Crime Classics series](https://shop.bl.uk/collections/crime-classics) is now recovering many of these titles for a new generation of readers. It turns out Kent may just be a more dangerous place than you realised.

Bibliography
Edwards, Martin. _The Golden Age of Murder: The Mystery of the Writers Who Invented the Modern Detective Story._ London: Collins Crime Club, 2015.

Oulton, Carolyn W. de la L. _Down From London: Seaside Reading in the Railway Age._ Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2022.
[‘Down From London? Looking for Literary Trouble at the British Seaside.’](https://liverpooluniversitypress.blog/2022/04/20/down-from-london-looking-for-literary-trouble-at-the-british-seaside/). April 2022.
