Bertha Porter (1852-1941)
Bertha Porter, biographer, and Egyptologist was born in Bloomsbury on April 9th, 1852. Her father, a noted architect, designed the Union Bank of London on Chancery Lane in 1865, and Bertha spent a very privileged childhood living in Charlotte Street and later Russell Square, where she became acquainted with [Charles Dickens](/dickens/dickens-biography), Thomas and Jane Carlyle, and Robert and Elizabeth Barrett Browning. (Times 22 1941). 

In the 1870s, Bertha’s parents, Frederick and Sarah Porter (nee Moyle), bought a seaside home on Marine Terrace Hythe. A partly completed hotel which was going cheap, it was remodelled it into a family home, which Frederick named Moyle Tower, in tribute to his wife. Sarah and Frederick quickly became part of the community, hosting annual parties for poor children and providing them with tea and games. Frederick later became mayor of Hythe (1886) and a magistrate for Kent (1888).  In December 1877, influenced by her cousin Frances Moberly, Bertha joined the Persistent Scribblers Society, a creative writing group for aspiring writers. Her name features in the subscription list with her father, mother and sister, Ethel,   however she did not contribute any pieces. It is possible that Bertha felt the society was not suited to her aspirations, as she disappears from the subscription list after only one notebook. 

Developing an interest in psychical research, Bertha became friendly with Edmund Gurney and F.W.H. Myers, who later authored Human Personality and its survival of bodily death. Myers notes in his book that experiments with the planchette (or ouija board) were conducted at Tynwald, Hythe in 1884 by Bertha’s cousin Frances Moberly. There were two other women present, and it is possible one of these was Bertha. Frances wrote:
<br>
“We — the operators — were requested to keep our minds a blank as far as possible and follow the first involuntary motion of the Planchette. In three out of five cases it wrote the name or initial or some word descriptive of the selected portrait. We also obtained the signatures to letters selected in the same manner. We both knew perfectly well that we were writing — not the spirits, as the rest of the company persist to this day in believing.”  Bertha’s friend, Edmund Gurney, had become interested in psychical research after three of his sisters tragically drowned when their boat capsized on the Nile during their 1875 tour of Egypt.  We do not know if Bertha knew them.

In 1885, Bertha Porter was appointed by Sidney Lee to write biographical entries for the Dictionary of National Biography (DNB). She wrote biographies mainly of nineteenth century architects and sixteenth century religious divines. Atkinson (2010, p.242) argues that the DNB “relegated women biographers to the more feminine genre of domestic biography,” writing mainly about family members or close acquaintances. In the 58th volume published in 1899, Porter contributed articles on Benjamin Lewis Vulliamy, clockmaker and his architect son, Lewis, who had been her father’s mentor.  Undoubtedly, she would have known the Vuillamy family, but it was her father’s connections as a member of the Royal Institute of British Architects, which would have made her closely connected to the profession and given her access to RIBA archives.  Unlike Sidney Lee’s sister Elizabeth who contributed mainly female entries, it was not until 1901, after submitting 155 articles to the DNB, that Bertha wrote an entry about a woman, her relative, writer Jessie Fothergill.  [Charlotte Carmichael Stopes](/19c/19c-stopes-biography), women’s rights campaigner who weekended at Swanscombe, was also a contributor to the DNB at this time, contributing two articles on her husband’s relatives. Porter subscribed to the Central Society for Women's Suffrage between 1903-4  and it is possible that she was acquainted with Carmichael Stopes who addressed a group of their members at Hampstead in 1903.  

Sidney Lee likened biography to chemistry, a scientific undertaking; favouring the ‘mausoleum’ style of Victorian life writing (Atkinson, 2010, pp224-5) and this is possibly why he appointed Bertha who had an analytical research background. Bertha had studied Egyptian hieroglyphics at University College, London at the turn of the century under the tutelage of Assistant Professor Francis Llewellyn Griffiths  and later at the University of Gottingen under Kurt Sethe, who developed a theory on the Egyptian verb. She was employed as a bibliographer by Griffith, who was now Professor of Egyptology at Oxford, to identify publications for inclusion in the Topographical Bibliography of Ancient Egyptian Hieroglyphic Texts, Reliefs, and Paintings   She worked on this for the next 20 years, until Rosalind Moss was appointed to assist her in 1924. Unlike her assistant, Bertha did not visit Egypt and so she relied on Rosalind to verify identifications. By 1929, Porter had retired from the project and only 2 of the six volumes were published during her editorship. 

With the death of her mother in 1912, Bertha’s connections with Hythe ended. It is likely due to her studies and research that she spent little time in Kent, only visiting at weekends or for holidays. In all the censuses, until 1911, she was living in London, apart from 1891, when her whereabouts is unknown. During the first world war she undertook war work, although it is not clear what this was. She later moved to Oxford where she took lodgings in the Banbury Road. She died on the 17th January, 1941 at 11, Crick Road. She was described as “musical, widely read, a good raconteur, and full of imagination, courage and cheerfulness, even when at last her sight failed her and reading became impossible.”  (Obituary)  
