Cooper’s Pit

Canterbury is at the intersection of two geological areas, the sticky London Clay beds to the north of the city and in the south the chalk of the North Downs. Cooper’s Pit is an [abandoned chalk quarry]( /landscape/chalk-pits-stig/) which has been designated a regionally important geological site (RIGS).[^ref1] Formerly known as Dane John Lime Works, it is located at the top of Lime Kiln Road in Wincheap.

The geology of the site is described in detail in the memoirs of the Geological Survey published by Smart, Bisson and Worssam. The pit is described as “the finest inland section in _M. [micraster] coranguinum_ chalk in the district’.[^ref2]  (p.155) The authors outline the soil and rock types which include soft white [chalk]( /landscape/kentish-chalk/), flint nodules and ‘abundant _Conulus_’.[^ref3] (156). Conulus were sea urchins that lived in the Cretaceous era, revealing that the land would have been submerged at this period. It was not until the end of the Chalk times (65 million years ago) that sea level fell.
<param ve-image url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/59/The_Victoria_history_of_the_county_of_Kent_BHL24007406.jpg" label="The Victoria History of the County of Kent BHL24007406" attribution="Biodiversity Heritage Library, Page, William, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons">

A layer of tabular flint known as Whitaker’s Three-inch Band is a feature of the site’s geology, and these flints can also be found north of Merton Farm and on Hollow Lane about 450 yards NW of Stuppington Farm.[^ref4] (155). There is some “local silicification of the chalk at the contact with benched drift deposits exposed in this cutting”.[^ref5] (155) Silicification occurs when rocks or organic matter come into contact with silica-rich surface water. Silicates (or flints) are tough rocks that were used by Stone Age people to make axe heads and light fires. These rocks are buried under sediments where groundwater can flow through them. Over the years, the road has cut down through the chalk to a depth of more than 10 feet in places.[^ref6] Flint near the base of Cooper’s pit is ‘associated with brown loams and clays infilling fissures and cavities and deposited from percolating waters’ (p156). The Bullhead Bed is overlain by glauconitic sand, loamy sands, patches of clay and sandy clay.[^ref7](p.186) 
<param ve-image url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/12/CanterburyHollowLane4400.JPG" label="Hollow Lane by Clem Rutter, Rochester Kent, CC BY-SA 3.0, via Wikimedia Commons" attribution="Clem Rutter" license="CC BY-SA 3.0">

The site was quarried for lime during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.  Lime was used as a mortar, wash or plaster in stone structures such as churches and bridges, but also for agricultural purposes and street paving. In 1862, George Ashbee advertised in the Kentish Gazette that “lime may be had in any quantity at the Dane John Lime Kiln”[^ref8] (“Lime, Lime, Lime.” Kentish Gazette - Tuesday 14 October 1862). Just over a decade later, it was being worked by Charles Chapman who offered “the best burnt lime” to builders, farmers, etc.[^ref9] (“To builders, farmers, etc” Kentish Gazette, 12 November, 1878). The ordnance survey map of 1870 shows the chalk pit in the fields reached by a track and far from the present-day housing.  By 1889 the Elham Valley railway ran through the site with three lime kilns marked on the map and a tunnel allowing access to a fourth. Haselfoot records that “an extensive system of 2ft (61cm)- gauge mineral lines were used to transport chalk from the quarry faces to the kilns”[^ref10] (Haselfoot AJ 1978 The Ind Arch of South-East England London Batsford (29). This 1875 map shows the path to the Lime Kiln from the end of Gordon Road.

After Charles Chapman’s death in 1900, his son continued the business until 1902 advertising ‘chalk and flints for sale’ and ‘lime for building and agricultural purposes by ton, yard or load’ (“Dane John Lime Works” 2 August 1902). In 1902, the lime pit along with its four kilns, some accommodation and arable land was put up for auction. (“Messrs Cooper and Wacher.” Canterbury Journal, 28 June 1902). It failed to attract a buyer and it was not until February 1904 that Frank Cooper announced to ‘builders, farmers, market gardeners, agriculturalists and others’ that ‘having purchased the above business, I beg to solicit the continuance of the kind patronage, which has for many years been extended to the previous owners’ (“Dane John Lime Works.” Kentish Gazette, 20 February, 1904).  

Cooper was clearly successful and by 1930 sought to erect a cement works at the Dane John Lime Works. Despite opposition from councillors and residents the Minister of Health approved the scheme. (“Cement Works allowed in Canterbury.” The Times, 30 September 1930).

Wartime brought its challenges as skilled quarrymen went to fight. One of Cooper’s employees, John Tucker was killed on active service (
On the home front, preparations were made for a possible invasion and a building on or near the Lime Works was adopted as a ‘fortified house’ to defend Canterbury’s southern edge. A road block was also set up across the north-east end of Lime Kiln Road, near where it meets Gordon Road. https://heritage.kent.gov.uk/Monument/MKE42851 

The site was also used as part of a dummy exercise by A.R.P. wardens who received an alert that there had been a drop of high explosive bombs. The practice was watched by Canterbury’s first female Mayor, Catherine Williamson along with other councillors and officials (“A.R.P. workers ready”.  Kent Herald, 17 January 1940)
In June 1943, one of Cooper’s employees, Branwell Ibberton, who had lit a kiln before dawn was fined for burning lime during the blackout (“Light on Hill.” Kent Herald, 2 June 1943)
The site continued as a lime and whiting works after the war.

Quarrying ceased in 1975 and part of the site was used as a builder’s merchant and for dumping rubble (“Save us from lorry menace” Kentish Gazette - Friday 05 June 1987). Plans to establish a civil engineering depot on the site in 1986 were turned down by the council as Lime Kiln Road was deemed unsuitable for heavy lorries due to its “restricted width and lack of pedestrian facilities”. Instead, the council began to investigate the possibility of using the site for recreation or nature study. By 2005, the north side of the pit had been built on, with the part south of the now disused railway line, a wilderness. Remains of its industrial past are now covered in graffiti or have become engulfed by the landscape as blackberry and hawthorn bushes occupy the space where Cooper and his workers once stood.

