## Traveller's Joy

**Exhibition**

When walking around the city of Canterbury, one quickly notices the amount of representation and references of the city’s rich cultural heritage. Promotional photos on shop windows, celebratory paintings in underpasses, an antiquarian bookshop named after [Geoffrey Chaucer](/14c/14c-chaucer-biography), and even a fish and chip shop called _The Canterbury Tales_. Murals are particularly popular, in the first thought to tackle the illegal graffiti, in the second to give a new look to some of the grimmer spots in the city. Their design refers to Canterbury’s past, architecture, and historical figures, which is not surprising as the last thirty years have seen a growing enthusiasm of the wider public for local and national history.  And as Robert Hewison claims: ʹthe impulse to preserve the past is part of the impulse to preserve the self.ʹ[^ref1] 

In 2018 the Canterbury City Council commissioned a new mural to cover pillars of the footbridge over the railway line next to the East Station which leads from the Lansdown Road Path to Oxford Street. The requirement was to make the neglected area more appealing, welcoming to the tourists, and generating a sense of pride for the locals. The winning design from the American artist [Gloria Treseder](https://www.gtreseder.com/), studying in Canterbury in that time, accomplished this mission by choosing a different direction than the other murals – she based it around the nature and literary references native to the Kent and Canterbury region.

Treseder draws the inspiration for her art from nature so the central element of the mural is a plant Clematis vitalba, also called traveller’s joy, which gave its name to the mural. Its leaves and vines lead the eye to the references from literature – Rupert Bear, David Copperfield, the pilgrims from The Canterbury Tales and finally Sherlock Holmes with Dr. Watson. Painted around them are various insects like the native English bee or the English ladybird, and silhouettes of children representing joy and playfulness. Additionally, Treseder used bright colours and illustrative, slightly expressive brush strokes.

The local audience would certainly agree that the mural showcases their heritage, but as Laurajane Smith points out: 'Heritage [is] a process of engagement, an act of communication and an act of making meaning in and for the present.'  It is us remembering and celebrating the following exhibits that makes them our heritage, and this mural establishes their cultural significance.

**Clematis vitalba**
The plant Clematis vitalba is one of the Kent’s five native woody climbers.  It has liana-like stems and prefers alkaline soils characteristic of the chalk hills of the Kent region. It is often found on fences, walls and hedgerows, and as a 'classic railway plant' it naturally covers large areas around the mural.  It might very well be this association with travelling and reaching a destination that dubbed the plant traveller’s joy. Or maybe we can imagine the joy of our ancestors who travelled through the wilderness, reaching a town with man-built walls covered in this plant. In the painting, Clematis is depicted in its seasonal forms. The winter form of the plant has clustered elongated seedpods covered in white fuzz which gave Clematis its other nickname – old man’s beard. There is not much known about the plant’s significance in history of the region, but it was used in traditional recipes to treat skin irritation and stress. The woody stems could also be used to make baskets. Clematis attracts a green moth Hemistola chrysoprasaria, which became a part of Canterbury’s green heritage and is referenced in the mural too. 

**Rupert Bear**
Rupert Bear is a children’s comic strip character first published on the 8th November 1920 in the Daily Express newspaper.  He was created by the Canterbury-born illustrator Mary Tourtel and thus became firmly rooted within the public vision of the city’s literary heritage. Mary herself was strongly connected with Canterbury's heritage throughout her life. Her brother worked as a stained glass restorer for the Cathedral, she studied at the Sidney Cooper School of Art, and she lived in Canterbury towards the end of her life. The places of her stay in the city are marked by commemorating plaques.  There were other writers born in Canterbury, like Richard Barham or Aphra Behn, but the popularity of Rupert Bear makes Mary Tourtel stand out as a well-known name throughout the nation, even after other artists took up the illustration.  Recently, John Beth brought to attention how Rupert Bear became a form of British citizenship training to the young audience (predominantly in the Rupert Annuals by Alfred Bestall), shaping a conception of Englishness, that positions individuals as loyal subjects within a socially integrated but monarchical society.  This adds another dimension to Rupert Bear in the context of heritage studies and it is worth exploring further. The “Rupert Little Bear” outlived his creator in the form of books, television series, merchandise and collectors memorabilia, and has accumulated a cult following of children as well as adults.  He had a permanent exhibition in Canterbury, Paul McCartney wrote a song about him, and this year marks a hundred years since his first publication, to which a celebratory 50p coin was issued. 

**David Copperfield**
The first character that welcomes the visitors is painted right next to the name of the mural.  It is David Copperfield, a character from the novel of the same name written by one of the most popular English authors Charles Dickens. Dickens is mostly associated with London, in fact the significance of the city in his work resulted in the phenomenon of ʹDickensian Londonʹ, a part of national heritage in its own right.  In this novel, however, he showcases the Kent landscape by having David travelling from London to Dover. On his way, David walks through Canterbury, the novel's holy site of prosperity according to Rosmarie Bodenheimer, where ʹthere were no such thing as change on earth.ʹ  David mentions ʹthe sunny street of Canterbury, dozing as it were in the hot light; and with the sight of its old houses and gateways, and the stately, grey Cathedral’ and creates the connection of the city with the famous and beloved author.  This desirable connection added Canterbury to the list of the tourist destinations of the ʹDickens Countryʹ. Literary tourism flourished in the Victorian England thanks to writers like Dickens. It connected the country and profiled a sense of ʹEnglishʹ culture. Alison Booth adds that ʹmuch of England's past is “Dickensian”, a heritage and homeland for the reader-citizen.ʹ  It attracts visitors and has become a source of pride for the locals, however, it has also created nostalgia for fictional and idealised past.

**The pilgrims from _The Canterbury Tales_**
One of the most worldwide famous references to Canterbury on the mural are The Canterbury Tales. This collection of stories was written by Geoffrey Chaucer, a prolific English medieval poet and the tales are told by the fictional pilgrims on their way to Canterbury. The centuries-long traditions of pilgrimage and tourism have been keeping the small city a vibrant centre. Even during the Black Death, the pilgrimage was at a peak as chronicled in the Tales, and Canterbury was a buoyant and exciting place with full houses and a rebuilt Cathedral nave.  Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger pay homage to Chaucer's work in their 1944 film A Canterbury Tale, where the characters willingly or unwillingly follow in the footsteps of the old pilgrims and even feel their presence.   The physical and spiritual journey of the characters encourages the audience to have a closer relationship with their national, local, and family heritage. During The Blitz, which endangered the British historical architecture, the film points to the importance of the intangible heritage. The celebration of national writers like Chaucer and his international readers ʹfurther allow us to understand literary heritage as a project of “collective memory”.ʹ  Contrary to Powell's pilgrims, the pilgrims in the Tales never reached Canterbury and as Carolyn Outlon clarifies: “there is no hard evidence that Chaucer did either.”  Finally, a Chaucer's statue found itself in the city in 2016 and connects the medieval pilgrims with the modern tourists walking down the High Street. 

**Sherlock Holmes & Dr. Watson**
The character of Sherlock Holmes created by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle is connected to Canterbury in one story only - The Final Problem, which was published as a book in The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes. The city is a backdrop to one scene only. Sherlock needed to travel to Switzerland to hide from his archenemy Professor Moriarty. He and Dr. Watson decided to take a train to Dover, unfortunately, Moriarty was on the very same train and therefore they got off in Canterbury to wait for another one.  The city does not seem to carry any significance in the story, but we can consider Doyle acknowledging Canterbury as the traditional link between London and the coast leading to the continental Europe. What we cannot deny, however, is Sherlock Holmes' substantial role as a representation of the English culture. Countless books, films, television programmes, attractions, even the signature tweeted coat, ʹdetectiveʹ hat and pipe still keep him alive, despite Doyle's decision to have Sherlock fall off a cliff in The Final Problem. In the late 1970s, even the Holmes-inspired literary tourism took off.  In this context, G. K. Chesterton notes that the popular fascination with Sherlock Holmes can lead to the future where some people genuinely believe that he was a real historical figure. Yet, David Hammer, an author of Sherlock-themed tours argues:
 ʹI never really believed that Holmes had lived. […] but I do believe that he was real; so real, in fact, that if he has not become a figure of history, he has of heritage, which surely constitutes a significant form of reality.ʹ 

The main objective of this exhibition is to show how the artist uses the elements of local heritage in the design of the mural, to represent Canterbury to locals and tourists, and educate the audience further about the specific nature and literary references. As the target audience comprises of any age group and educational background, it is important that the exhibition catalogue uses the appropriate language that is understandable for all, yet still informative and built on scholarly resources. 
The visual nature of the main object of the exhibit is a dominant strength, because it catches the attention and is simply interesting and engaging to look at. The layout of the exhibition mirrors the mural itself – the illustrations of Clematis, Rupert Bear, Copperfield, pilgrims and Sherlock lay on the virtual wall like they do on the walls of the bridge. And around them there are insects and silhouettes of children, adding dynamics and playfulness to the canvas. In a sense, it is an exhibition within an exhibition.

The virtual nature of the exhibition adds to its accessibility, which is crucial as we have experienced in the past few months. The audience can visit the mural at their own leisure and their experience will be accompanied by a guide on their mobile devices.

I found a weakness of this exhibition in the lack of academic resources available for the research of these exhibits as elements of heritage. While the limited word count does not allow for a thorough analysis in a wider context, it is essential to, at least attempt to establish the themes of the connection between the exhibits and Canterbury's not just historic but also cultural heritage. There is still space to improve, especially in the children's literature and green heritage. Additionally, a lot of the relevant information appears to be general knowledge that is not noted in proper scholarly sources, but rather mentioned on side in online articles and on websites that might not be considered appropriate for an academic piece of writing. Still, I would argue for using these kinds of references in this particular research, as they fill in the gaps and add context to popular opinions and culture.

I would suggest that the exhibition should be more interactive. In these days of technical advancements, when even books and films use the audience's input, people want more hands on and novelty experience in museums and galleries to absorb as much information as possible. The central video added a helpful introduction to the presentation, but the use of animation, music, spoken word or interactive digital projection is a standard of modern museums. Of course, the time to prepare the exhibition and the technical limitations of the platform did not allow for this. Still, a more empirical approach is necessary to maximise the exhibition's success. In the words of Confucius: ʹI hear and I forget, I see and I remember, I experience and I understand.ʹ 
 
### Bibliography

[“David Copperfield by Charles Dickens.”](http://www.literatureproject.com/david-copperfield/index.htm).   
[“The Canterbury Tales and other Poems of Geoffrey Chaucer.”](http://www.literatureproject.com/canterbury-tales/index.htm).   
Pressburger E., Powell, M., dir. 'A Canterbury Tale'. 1944; UK: General Films Distributior. Online.   
The Complete Sherlock Holmes Canon. “The Final Problem.” Available at: https://sherlock-holm.es/stories/pdf/a4/1-sided/fina.pdf [last accessed: 12.11.2020].   
Beck, J.,”Rupert Bear and the making of English Citizens.” New Review of Children's Literature and Librarianship, 18:1 (2012): pp: 47-66.   
Bodenheimer, R., “Copperfield's Geographies.” Dickens Studies Annual  42 (2011): pp. 177-191.   
Booth, A., “Time-Travel in Dickens' World.” In Literary Tourism and Nineteenth-Century Culture, ed. N. Watson, pp. 150-163. Pelgrave Macmillan UK, 2009.   
Canterbury City Council Online Archived. “Museum of Canterbury with Rupert Bear Museum.” Available at: https://web.archive.org/web/20100323051120/http://www.canterbury.gov.uk/main.cfm?objectid=48 [last accessed: 15.11.2020].
Canterbury Historical & Archaeological society. “Chaucer statue.” Available at: http://www.canterbury-archaeology.org.uk/chaucer-statue/4594466862 [last accessed: 15.11.2020].
Canterbury Historical & Archaeological society. “Geoffrey Chaucer (1343-1400).” Available at: http://www.canterbury-archaeology.org.uk/chaucer/4590809466  [last accessed: 12.11.2020].
Canterbury Historical & Archaeological society. “Mary Tourtel (1874-1948).” Available at: http://www.canterbury-archaeology.org.uk/tourtel/4590809564  [last accessed: 12.11.2020].
Canerbury Museums & Galleries. “Rupert Bear Centenary Celebration.” Available at: https://canterburymuseums.co.uk/events/rupert-bear-centenary-exhibition/ [last accessed: 12.11.2020].
Curtis, C. C., “Powell and Pressburger's "A Canterbury Tale": New Pilgrims, Old Pilgrimage.” Literature/Film Quarterly, 36:1 (2008): pp. 68-77. 
Hewison,  R., The Heritage Industry: Britain in a Climate of Decline (London: Methuen, 1987).
Lyle, M., Book of Canterbury (Batsford: English Heritage, 1994).
McLaughlin, D., “Holmes as heritage: readers, tourism and the making of Sherlock Holmes’s England.” In Creating Heritage For Tourism,  ed. C. Palmer and J. Tivers,  pp. 89-100. Online version pp. 1-18. London: Routledge, 2018. Available at: https://rb.gy/gcqumc  [last accessed: 12.11.2020].
Misiura, S., Heritage Marketing (Amsterdam; London : Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann, 2006).
Moffat, K., Outlon, C. W. de la L., “David Copperfield – a curated walk.” Kent Maps. Available at: https://kent-maps.online/dickens/david-copperfield-curated-walk  [last accessed: 12.11.2020].
Outlon, C., “L is for Literature.” The Christ Church Heritage A to Z. Available at: https://medium.com/the-christ-church-heritage-a-to-z/l-is-for-literature-1509ef2da5ec  [last accessed: 12.11.2020].
Outline Atlas of the British and Irish Flora. “Clematis vitalba.” Available at: https://www.brc.ac.uk/plantatlas/plant/clematis-vitalba  [last accessed: 12.11.2020].
Smith, L., Uses of Heritage (London: Routledge, Taylor &Francis Group, 2006).
Sweetinburgh, S., “P is for Pilgrims.” The Christ Church Heritage A to Z. Available at: https://medium.com/the-christ-church-heritage-a-to-z/p-is-for-pilgrims-70855b5fa186 [last accessed: 12.11.2020].
The Followers of Rupert Bear. “Rupert Merchandise.” Available at: https://followersofrupertbear.co.uk/sales/ [last accessed: 15.11.2020].
The Westminster Collection. “The WORLD'S FIRST Rupert Bear 50p.” Available at: https://www.westminstercollection.com/p-321M/The-Rupert-Bear-Brilliant-Uncirculated-50p.aspx?sn=8&gclid=CjwKCAiA17P9BRB2EiwAMvwNyHSGn7ydtCyW8jJBnZ-ULOWfwrGuaVdvhq1fIM0D4QdjJ6t2tHtaBBoCyCUQAvD_BwE  [last accessed: 15.11.2020].
Ultimate Classic Rock. “Watch Paul McCartney's restored ʹRupert and the Frogʹ movie.” Available at: https://followersofrupertbear.co.uk/sales/ [last accessed: 15.11.2020].
Vujakovic, P., “I is for Ivy.” The Christ Church Heritage A to Z. Available at: https://medium.com/the-christ-church-heritage-a-to-z/i-is-for-ivy-9c259f80cb2e  [last accessed: 12.11.2020].
Visual material:
David Copperfield in Canterbury painting:
Reynolds, F., David reaches Canterbury. In Ch. Dickens The Personal History of David Copperfield (Toronto: Musson Book Co., 1910?) pp. 160-161. Available at: https://archive.org/details/personalhistoryo00dickuoft/page/184/mode/2up [last accessed: 15.11.2020].

First edition of The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes by Sir A. Conan Doyle:
Raptis Rare Books.”The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes.” Available at: https://www.raptisrarebooks.com/product/the-memoirs-of-sherlock-holmes-arthur-conan-doyle-first-edition-rare/ [last accessed: 12.11.2020].

Geoffrey Chaucer in an illuminated manuscript:
Canterbury Historical & Archaeological society. “Geoffrey Chaucer (1343-1400).” Available at: http://www.canterbury-archaeology.org.uk/chaucer/4590809466  [last accessed: 12.11.2020].

Rupert Bear illustration by Mary Tourtel: 
Canterbury Historical & Archaeological society. “Mary Tourtel (1874-1948).” Available at: http://www.canterbury-archaeology.org.uk/tourtel/4590809564  [last accessed: 12.11.2020].

The Video:
Karaskova, M., Piesova, S. Traveller's Joy Design - Love Where We Live Project. 11.6.2018. https://vimeo.com/274518215.
The virtual exhibition: https://cccu.padlet.org/mkaraskova3981/azsnpik5wfnnzwro 

Other photos were taken by the author.

### References

[^ref1]: R. Hewison, The Heritage Industry: Britain in a Climate of Decline (London: Methuen, 1987), p. 43-5.


