
Guglielmo Marconi (1874 –1937)
Guglielmo Marconi, inventor of wireless telegraphy, moved to Britain from Italy in February 1896.  He was not a stranger to Britain, as he had lived in Bedford with his Irish mother as a child and had British citizenship. Having failed to gain sponsorship from the Italian government to develop his ideas in wireless telegraphy, he travelled to London via Dover to seek funds to convert his experiments into practical use.  Sir Oliver Lodge had previously presented ideas on wireless telegraphy at the British Association for the Advancement of Science in Oxford in 1894 and bitterly complained that Marconi had “evidently got all his ideas” from a book that he had published after his lecture.[^ref1] However, Sungook Hong argues that Lodge’s lecture had nothing to do with telegraphy and that “the image of Lodge as the inventor of wireless telegraphy was deliberately constructed by his friends and by Lodge himself” (26).
<param ve-image url=”https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/0d/Guglielmo_Marconi.jpg 
“ label=”  “ attribution=”  “>

In July 1896, Marconi contacted William Preece, Chief Electrician at the Post Office, who was impressed with his ideas. At a meeting at the British Association for the Advancement of Science in September, Preece stated in his lecture that “an Italian had come here with a box giving a quite new system of space telegraphy” (Preece 1896b qtd Hong p. 38). Members of the Association were indignant that Preece had overlooked British work and “taken up an Italian adventurer” (Hong p.38), particularly after Preece offered that the Post Office would give Marconi financial support. 
<br><br>
By March 1897, Marconi had succeeded in transmitting over a distance of 4 miles.[Hong 39] The scientific world longed to know what exactly Marconi’s “secret box” contained. Lodge bemoaned “the public has been educated by a secret box more than it would have been by many volumes of Philosophical Transactions and Physical Society Proceedings” (qtd in Hong 39).
In 1897, a team of experts from the Post Office conducted wireless telegraphy experiments with the Royal Engineers at Fort Burgogyne, Dover. The apparatus was placed on a horse-drawn trolley and stations were set up at Swingate and St Margaret’s.[^ref2] Marconi had planned to conduct similar experiments at Salisbury a week later but had been alerted by William Preece that the Post Office planned to conduct the experiments at Dover. He wrote to Preece:
“In consequence to your letter, my experiments arranged to take place last week at Salisbury were postponed, you having suggested that I had better go to Dover. I now understand that the Post Office people have gone to Dover without me. Mr Gavey having told me in confidence that my presence cannot be permitted. At a board meeting of my company yesterday, much regret was expressed that the experiments at Dover are to be conducted in my absence with apparatus which may not may not be satisfactory.” (Preece 237)
