Albert Makaula, the son of a Bhaca Chief, was born in the Eastern Cape in 1865.[^ref1] Although his beginnings were in South Africa, he settled in Kent where he became a farmer. 
<br><br>
As an infant, Albert grew seriously ill. It was considered a liability to have a weak son who could not defend himself and his people. Chief Makaula and Albert's mother, "The Great Wife," tried everything to cure young Albert.[^ref2] Out of ideas, his parents took advantage of improving relations with the British. They took Albert to Reverend Charles White in Osborn. The Whites had no children of their own. Chief Makaula asked White if he could treat young Albert, and if he could he could keep Albert, but if not, then they were to bury him. The Whites agreed, and Albert's health improved. The White's adopted Albert, thus he added the name, White, making him Albert Makaula-White. 

Albert grew up as a Black child amongst White people. He integrated well and is described as speaking perfect English and enjoyed conversing, particularly with adults. He spent most of his time in and around the church and looked to follow his Father's way. Most of his youth was spent in South Africa; however, he also spent time in England. He was in England at the end of the 1880s, but with his mother seriously ill and his Father dying in 1888, Albert returned to South Africa in 1890.[^ref3] After the death of his parents, Albert decided to follow in the footsteps of his Father and study to become a clergyman at the Richmond Theological College in Surrey. However, he only attended the college for one year, from October 1890 to October 1891. This was due to being recalled by the South African Methodist Conference, who were responsible for funding Albert's education.  

In December 1891, Albert married Eleanor Botting at Wesleyan Methodist Church in Strood, Kent.[^ref4] Eleanor was a local dressmaker and the daughter of a carpenter. Interracial relationships in the late 19th century and in the early 20th century became more regular, but no means common. Eleanor's parents did attend the wedding. However, many people in interracial relationships and/or mixed-race people were met with disapproval and often faced similar or worse discrimination than Black people. This can be demonstrated by the fact that mixed ethnicity only became an option in the 2001 Census, 110 years after Albert and Eleanor's marriage.[^ref5] Before this, mixed-race people were also called Negros or Coloured (these were considered the polite terms). This perhaps was a factor in the couple moving back to South Africa not long after getting married, as it would be in more familiar surroundings. The Makaula-White's had three children, all born in South Africa: Irene, in 1893, Charles in 1897 and Claude in 1898. 
<param ve-image url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/41/Wesleyan_Church_Strood.jpg" label="Wesleyan Church, Strood" attribution="Postcard, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons">

After Albert was fired in 1902, the family moved back to Kent. It is there he got into farming, even though he had no previous farming experience. All the more impressive because the agricultural industry plummeted in the late 19th century, due to food imports.[^ref6] Albert took over his first farm, Stubble Hill Farm, in Lenham in 1905.[^ref7]  This would have been unusual to have a Black man in a role of authority. However, Albert's familiarity with British way of life would have undoubtedly aided the family's integration into rural Kent. Jo Beany recalled her Grandfather's account of working for the Makaula-White's: "Granddad couldn't speak highly enough of the Makaula-White's. Wonderful people, very considerate of their workforce. Always a good supply of tea and soft drinks, much appreciated on those hot summer days."[^ref8]

Albert worked as a farm manager through the early 20th century across many different farms in Kent. All of his children maintained their roots in Kent. However, naturally, they moved away to different parts of the county. Charles lived in Faversham. Although Claude moved around the country to pursue a cricket career, in the late 1930s he moved to Maidstone. Irene, however, was a theatrical performer who lived mainly in France. At times, Charles and Claude worked on the farm for their Father. 1925-1928 Poverst Farm in Orpington was listed to be run by Makaula-White and Sons.[^ref9]

The winter of 1927 into 1928 was extremely cold and snowy.[^ref10] Many roads and paths had to be dug out so that people could access the outer world after being snowed in. The extreme weather would have a costly effect on Albert. In January 1928, the RSPCA took him to court for neglecting the pigs on his farm.[^ref11] Albert declared to the court that he sold all of the pigs in question to Commander Egleton around Christmas. The pair came to a gentleman's agreement that Albert would house the pigs until Egleton would collect them in January. In the meantime, Egleton's farm manager was to feed the pigs. However, he claimed there was a miscommunication, and he believed Albert was also meant to feed the pigs part of the time.[^ref12] Both parties were fined. Albert was fined £10, approximately £460 (as of 2017).13 This gained unwanted public attention. The Makaula-White's lived at two different farms in 1928, until they moved to Court Lodge in Doddington in 1929. At Court Lodge, they strictly only dealt with wheat, barley, oats, and beans. 

As Albert aged, his financial issues grew, and his mental health declined. He remained working in the agricultural industry until his death on 13th September 1937, aged 72. After her husband's death, Eleanor lived with Claude in Maidstone until she died in 1944. 

Albert Makaula-White's life was a testament to resilience and determination. Despite his uncertain beginning, he rose above his challenges to achieve great things. A proud Christian and successful businessman, he not only integrated himself into a world where he began at a disadvantage but also earned the respect of his peers. Albert showed he was best placed in quaint remote villages, whether in the scorching sun of South Africa or the snowy streets of Kent.  

### References

[^ref1]: Taylor, Erica. Little Known Black History: Albert Makaula. 5 Jun. 2012. https://blackamericaweb.com/2012/06/05/little-known-black-history-fact-albert-makaula-2/ 
[^ref2]: Sherwood, Marika. The Life and Times of Albert Makula-White, an African Farmer in Kent 1904-1937. Savannah Press. 2012. 
[^ref3]: Old Ebor. The Inkosi’s Grandson: The Thwarted Career of C.A.V Makaula. 6 Feb. 2024. https://oldebor.wordpress.com/2024/02/06/the-inkosis-grandson-the-thwarted-career-of-c-a-v-makaula/ 
[^ref4]: Kent Archives. “Albert Makaula-White post.” https://www.facebook.com/KentArchives/posts/2227854737324649/. 
[^ref5]: Office for National Statistics. Population size: 7.9% from a minority ethnic group. 13 Feb. 2003. https://www.ons.gov.uk/ 
[^ref6]: Basford, Hazel and McIntosh, K.H. East Kent Gazetter in the Great War 1914-1918. Parker Digital Press. ISBN: 9780954478957. 2008. 
[^ref7]: Sherwood, Marika. _The Life and Times of Albert Makula-White, an African Farmer in Kent 1904-1937._ Savannah Press. 2012. 
[^ref8]: Sherwood, Marika. _The Life and Times of Albert Makula-White, an African Farmer in Kent 1904-1937_. Savannah Press. 2012. 
[^ref9]: Sherwood, Marika. _The Life and Times of Albert Makula-White, an African Farmer in Kent 1904-1937._ Savannah Press. 2012. 
[^ref10]: Staveley-Wadham, Rose. “A Look at the History of Britain’s Extreme Winter Weather.” Headlines in History. The British Newspaper Archive Blog. https://blog.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/2020/12/04/history-of-britains-extreme-winter-weather/. 4 Dec. 2020. 
[^ref11]: Old Ebor. The Inkosi’s Grandson: The Thwarted Career of C.A.V Makaula. 6 Feb. 2024. https://oldebor.wordpress.com/2024/02/06/the-inkosis-grandson-the-thwarted-career-of-c-a-v-makaula/ 
[^ref12]: Sherwood, Marika. The Life and Times of Albert Makula-White, an African Farmer in Kent 1904-1937. Savannah Press. 2012. 
[^ref13]: The National Archives. Currency Converter : 1270-2017.  https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/currency-converter/#currency-result. 


 
