Florence Nightingale (1820 – 1910)
Social reformer and nursing campaigner, Florence Nightingale, who rose to fame after her work in the Crimea, was instrumental in establishing an army medical school at Fort Pitt, Chatham in 1860. 
Three years earlier, Florence had been asked by Sir John Liddell, Director-General of the Navy Medical Department, to “introduce female nurses into naval hospitals.” She visited Chatham, which was a military, as well as naval, station with Sir John and her friend Miss Carter in March 1857. [p.349] During the visit, they inspected the Garrison Hospital at Chatham Barracks, Melville Naval Hospital and the General Hospital at Fort Pitt. It was reported that she spent “nearly three hours at Melville, during which she inspected the dispensing rooms, washhouses, &c., the whole of which met with her warm approval”. “Visit of Miss Nightingale to the Chatham Hospitals” South Eastern Gazette - Tuesday 31 March 1857
However,  After the visit, Florence wrote to Sir John McNeill, Scottish surgeon and diplomat: “This disgraceful state of our Chatham Hospitals, which I have been visiting lately, is only one more symptom of a system which, in the Crimea, put to death 16,000 men—the finest experiment modern history has seen upon a large scale, viz. as to what given number may be put to death at will by the sole agency of bad food and bad air.” McNeill who had been sent to investigate the conditions of the Crimean hospitals as sanitary commissioner had raised awareness of some of the “lamentable laxity and inefficiency” of Lord Raglan’s staff. [“An Echo of the Crimea” Yorkshire Post and Leeds Intelligencer - Wednesday 17 August 1910] In his report he had highlighted that the men encamped on Sebastapol suffered from “a deficiency of fresh meat, a deficiency of vegetables, a deficiency of fresh bread, particularly for the sick, and more especially for those whose gums were affected with scurvy.” He also commented on “a deficiency of hay and straw, to such an extent that enough could not be procured to fill the paillasses of the sick.” (p.6 Com. of Inquiry into Supplies of British Army in Crimea, Report, Evidence, Appendix]
It was not only the men who received her attention and whilst visiting the hospital Florence made enquiries about the Chatham Garrison Compassionate Institute which provided “food, clothing and lodging” for the sick women and children of the garrison. She gave the institute a donation of 50 guineas. [“Miss Nightingale at Chatham” Dorset County Chronicle - Thursday 09 April 1857]
[Queen Victoria](/19c/19c-victoria-biography) had admired Florence Nightingale’s work in the Crimea, writing: 'I envy her being able to do so much good and look after the noble heroes whose behaviour is admirable'.[Royal Collections website https://www.rct.uk/collection/2853480/florence-nightingale-1820-1910] and had visited wounded soldiers at the hospital at Fort Pitt three times in 1855. After the war, she invited Florence to Balmoral, where Florence outlined the reforms that were needed in military hospitals [Hibbert p.225]
Fort Pitt was a military hospital used to receive and assess soldiers invalided back to Britain after service abroad. However, as Florence observed:
“Formerly, young men were sent to attend sick and wounded soldiers, who perhaps had never dressed a serious wound, or never attended a bedside, except in the midst of a crowd of students, following in the wake of some eminent lecturer, who certainly had never been instructed in the most ordinary sanitary knowledge” [391]
At the opening of the Army Medical Practical School on the 2nd October 1860, Deputy Inspector-General T. Longmore, Professor of Military Surgery, gave a speech about the need for army medical training in which he said “There is one, however, whose opinion derived from large experience and remarkable sagacity in observation, exerted an especial influence in originating and establishing this school. I should hardly have presumed to refer to Miss Nightingale by name, so unostentatiously was her influence in this matter exerted, had not one of the Royal Commissioners, prominent from his high position, and by all he had done to diffuse military sanitation knowledge, recently made public mention of this fact.” [p.349 Statistical, Sanitary, and Medical Reports for the Year 1859. The Royal College of Physicians - “Statistical, Sanitary, and Medical Reports for the Year 1859.” RCP Library, Printed by Harrison and Sons, 1861. Wiley Digital Archives: The Royal College of Physicians. Accessed 11 Apr. 2025.
The first students who arrived [p.390] found that the school was not properly equipped and Florence had to intervene again. She was also responsible for nominating the professors of hygiene and pathology [390]
In June 1862, Florence presented a paper at the Congres International de Bienfaisance on Army Sanitation Reform in which she outlined the advantages of trained attendants at the Army Medical School at Chatham. She also took the opportunity to comment on the system of “regulation” of “camp vices” and the “open infamous trading in prostitution” that took place in the army recommending that the men’s barracks should be made more like home with libraries, reading rooms and innocent games. [“Miss Nightingale on Army Sanitation Reform” West Somerset Free Press - Saturday 21 June 1862
However, despite her privately printed paper Note on the Supposed Protection Afforded Against Venereal Diseases, by recognizing Prostitution and Putting It under Police Regulation in which she outlined statistics on hospital admissions for venereal disease, the [Contagious Diseases Prevention Act](/19c/19c-contagious-diseases) was still passed two years later and Chatham’s purpose built Lock hospital, to treat those arrested under the Act, was constructed in 1869. In 1870, the “The Ladies’ National Association for the Repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts” was launched including Nightingale and [Josephine Butler](/19c/19c-butler-biography) who travelled to Chatham and other Kent towns on a campaign to repeal the act.

https://lifeandtimesofflorencenightingale.wordpress.com/time-line/
Twenty years after establishing the Army Medical School at Chatham, Florence returned to Kent for her own health.
After the death of her mother, in February 1880, Florence suffered a nervous collapse and was prescribed “sea air”. She spent three weeks at the Granville Hotel, [Ramsgate]( /19c/19c-ramsgate/), a smart hotel on Victoria Parade designed by Edward Welby Pugin, the son of [Augustus Pugin](19c/19c-pugin-biography). As a spa hotel it was equipped with hydropathic, ozone, saline, plunge and [Turkish baths](/19c/19c-turkish-baths) [Hygiene, volume 2- additions [3]
by Hartshorne, Henry, 1823-1897. circa 1866-1876]. However, despite the sea air and its state of the art bathing facilities, Ramsgate failed to revive her and she wrote to Miss Pringle:  “The doctors tell me, “I must be ‘free’ for at least a year ‘from the responsibilities which have been forced upon me’ (and which, they might say, I have so ill fulfilled) and from ‘letters.’ But when is that year to come? I believe, however, I must go away again for a time, if only to work up the arrears of my Indian work, which weigh heavily on my mind.” [p324 ] https://www.gutenberg.org/files/40058/40058-h/40058-h.htm


The Granville was popular with weekenders and holiday-makers, including the _Punch_ illustrator [Edward Linley Sambourne](/19c/19c-sambourne-biography) and Fanny Kemble who visited the hotel in 1886 “where she could breathe the fresh, if very chilly, sea air and be away from the poisonous and dense fog that stank in her nostrils” [Fanny Kemble : a performed life by David, Deirdre, 2007] in London.
